---
layout: post
title: Star Wars: An Impostor's Syndrome!
---

I thought I would begin with something the world just doesn't have enough of: a Star Wars think piece.

I saw Star Wars: The Last Jedi over the holidays. I liked it and there is a lot that I want to say about it, but I am going to start by talking about Luke and why he mattered to me in this movie. It may be relevant that I have not read any of the Extended Universe stuff.

Spoilers for The Last Jedi and A New Hope follow.

Luke is on some far-off isolated planet and Rey has gone there with his lightsaber (probably hoping he’ll train her to use it), but Luke is grumpy and closed-off. The Force Awakens told us Luke hadn’t been heard from in a long time and part of this movie’s plot is to tell us why. Luke answers this question early on superficially: he didn’t come to this isolated place because he wanted to be found; he came to die. Alone.

But why did he want that?

When we first meet Luke in A New Hope, he is a young farm boy who fixes droids and dreams of adventure. More recent “hero’s journey” characters are forced into heroism by some quirk of birth or circumstance while [constantly wishing they could go home](http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/IJustWantToBeNormal), but Luke was the opposite. He dreamt of being a hero, but his sense of responsibility to his Uncle Owen stopped him. Once that is gone, he takes off with Obi-Wan. From there it is a whirlwind of meeting princesses, getting trapped in garbage compactors, losing the mentor he had only just found and piloting an X-Wing that delivers the key shot that destroys a super-weapon. There is no time to think and very little to lose.
The next two movies give Luke a bit more space to process everything that is happening, but Luke is still in training, still becoming the thing that he dreamed of being. The question that the Last Jedi asks is “What happens once you’re there?” Once Luke completes his hero’s journey, once the rebels have won, once Obi-Wan and Yoda and his father are ghost-smiling down at him… then what?
In the minds of the rebels, Luke is a legend. In the minds of the Jedi council, he is going to train the next generation of Jedi and the Light Side of the Force will shine bright. In the minds of Star Wars fans, Luke is a brave hero. But in Luke’s own mind, he is still some farm boy from Tatooine who wants to be a hero, but doesn’t think he knows how. In his mind, he did what he could, but not alone. He did it with Leia, who is a better diplomat and calmer negotiator than him. He did it with Han, who is a better pilot and bluffer than him. He did it with Yoda and Obi-Wan, who were wiser and more experienced than him. And he isn’t sure that he can do it again.
Luke suffers from [impostor syndrome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impostor_syndrome).
When he says in the movie that the Jedi make people into legends, he isn’t just saying that it is bad because people believe in something that isn’t true or because the venerated Jedi are misleading people. He is saying that it’s bad for him because he doesn’t know how to be that person, but everyone trusts and believes that he is. That is why he left. When Luke was training Ben Solo and sensed the Dark Side, he knew he was supposed to stop it, but he didn’t know how. And so, in the moment, he failed. And then, because he didn’t think he was allowed to fail, he left.
This is what Yoda shows up to tell him (seems like he could have said something earlier, but no rush when you’re a Force ghost I guess): it is okay that you failed. But now Rey is going to try to save Kylo and be a hero and Luke hasn’t used his experience to guide her. He promised her three lessons, but he is one short: how do you deal with the pressure to be great and save everyone when you know you are just a human (or, well, a human with the Force)?
How can you deal with impostor syndrome? The answers from the movie are surprisingly close to what’s known about dealing with impostor syndrome in this Universe. Yoda advises that Luke teach Rey about his failure (openly discuss impostor syndrome's existence so that people realize others feel the same way). R2 tries to remind Luke of when he first became a hero by showing him the clip of Leia (keep a record of past accomplishments to make them harder to dismiss as luck or not a big deal). But also, the movie seems to suggest, it should never have been down to just one person. The opening crawl says the resistance wanted Luke to return and restore a spark of hope in tough times, but later Poe and others recognize that they are the spark, the ones in the resistance now. Sometimes it takes legends to inspire people. Luke says that the Jedi Council make legends, but they can’t make them without building on something real, and that reality is full of courage and hard work but also failure and coping with it. That is really what you need to make legends, but we usually coast over those tough bits and mislead ourselves.
Although the end of Luke’s story does involve a long lightsaber battle, the real ending of his story is him coming to terms with both his failures and his legendary status. Luke doesn’t just meet Kylo to fight him; he meets him to tell him that he failed him and he is sorry. And… it doesn’t really change anything. Because who Kylo is was the result of many things, including Luke's training, but also his relationship with his parents and his grandfather’s legacy (Luke wasn’t the only one who couldn’t live up to the legendary Skywalker status) and interference by Snoke.
And then Luke literally uses some projection of his legendary self, a thing that is not real but that is still useful, to distract Kylo while the rebels escape.
Hopefully in the next movie Luke can Force ghost his legendary self into someone who will finally train Rey to use a lightsaber though.
