---
layout: post
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
title: "Star Wars: An Absurdist's Journey"
tags: movies star-wars philosophy harry-potter
---

Since I've alredy done a [Star Wars think piece]({{ site.baseurl }}/Star-Wars-Impostor-Syndrome), I figured it was time to move on to the inevitable Star Wars Hero's Journey think piece. Here, I propose that The Last Jedi falls somewhere in between A New Hope and The Wizard of Oz, which may not make any sense, so let me try to explain.

Spoilers for The Last Jedi, The Wizard of Oz, Harry Potter, Alice in Wonderland and other Star Wars movies follow.
<!--more-->

Quite some time ago, I became taken with an idea from [an online piece](https://www.overthinkingit.com/2008/09/10/fixing-pans-labyrinth/) that there are different types of hero's journeys. In all hero's journey's a character goes from their "normal" world to a new one, faces trials and learns something from those trials. However, in some stories, what the protagonist learns makes them a hero in the eyes of the world and brings them concrete rewards and in other stories, the protagonist learns that the world is a crazy place beyond their control. The piece termed these boy's and girl's journeys, respectively, and I will note that the most prominent examples of the latter do have female main characters, but since more movies starring women are coming out and it is possible to find counterexamples in both genres, I will instead use the terms conquering journey and accepting journey.

To explain more fully, I will go through a few examples, focusing on three main places in the story:

1. When the characters first cross the threshold from old world to new
2. In the atonement with the father or the moment where the hero really faces down everything that has happened to them and realizes what they have learned.
3. Crossing the Return threshold. How can the hero use what they have learned?

I will explain using examples from other stories before returning to The Last Jedi at the end. I have stuck here to more "mythical" examples for the sake of comparison with Star Wars, although most Western stories follow this structure. (Dan Harmon has a lot of great writing about it). For the conquering journey, I will discuss Star Wars: A New Hope and Harry Potter. For the accepting journey, I will discuss The Wizard of Oz and Alice in Wonderland.

## 1. Crossing the Threshold
In the hero's journey, the main character is in some world that they've grown up in and usually they are facing some sort of problem with it and then something happens where they have a chance to get out of that old life. Often there is a guide or mentor to help them.

In A New Hope, Luke lives on Tatooine with his Aunt and Uncle, fixing droids and dreaming of adventure. When Leia's message arrives, Luke goes to see Obi-Wan Kenobi, who tries to get Luke to leave with him. Because of his sense of duty to his family, Luke refuses, but when he returns to find the farm destroyed and his Aunt and Uncle dead, Luke goes with Obi-Wan, who serves as his mentor for this movie.

In Harry Potter, Harry is living his miserable life being neglected by the Dursleys when he finds himself talking to a snake at the zoo. Later Hagrid shows up to tell Harry he is a wizard and take him to Hogwarts. Hagrid is Harry's guide through these early stages of entering Hogwarts.

In both of these cases, Luke and Harry choose to leave their old lives behind and enter a new one. It is true that there isn't much for Luke on Tatooine now and that Harry likely doesn't want to spend any more time with the Dursleys than necessary, but in theory they each could choose to stay. And at later points in their journey, they could choose to leave and go back.

In The Wizard of Oz, Dorothy lives on her farm with her Aunt and Uncle in Kansas when her house is picked up and carried away to Oz by a tornado. As Glinda the Good then explains to her, the house landed on the Wicked Witch of the East by pure chance. And if Dorothy wants to get home, she'll need to seek out the Wizard. In the traditional structure, one would expect Glinda is the guide, but her advice is quite limited and she disappears for large portions of the story.

In Alice in Wonderland, Alice is sitting around by the river, bored, while her sister reads a book with no pictures. Alice sees a rabbit with a pocketwatch and attempts to follow him, but ends up falling down a rabbit hole. There she meets all kinds of confusing creatures. Are any of them her guide? She follows the white rabbit, but he doesn't know it, so he's not really leading her and throughout the story he reappears but is not helpful and barely acknowledges her existence. The Cheshire Cat appears a few times, directing her, but toward the mad tea party, which hardly seems helpful. The most helpful creature seems to be the caterpillar she meets early on who advises her on how to finally get back to her normal size, but he never returns.

And this seems to be something of a theme in acceptance journeys: there are no real guides. And there are creatures or people who might seem to be guides who actually just point you down more convoluted paths. Also, neither Dorothy nor Alice choose to go on their journey. It is possible to argue that neither of them are particularly satisfied in their initial world, feeling bored and so on, and so they take certain actions that lead to them entering a new world, but entering the new world wasn't their intention at that time. It was an accident and, once there, they have no way back. Indeed, their journey basically consists of them trying to find a way home, even though that wasn't a place they seemed all that interested in when they were there. I wouldn't say that accidentally entering the new world is a requirement for the acceptance journey, but the lack of a useful guide seems fairly prominent.

## 2. Atonement with the Father
We are skipping a lot of the journey here because in both cases you have the protagonist meeting people, making friends and encountering enemies, getting into and out of trouble. That is the Road of Trials in both cases. But at some point, the hero will reach a breaking point where the sum of everything they have faced and everything they have done confronts them and they realize something. Sometimes the thing they are confronting is a literal person, a father figure.

The classic Star Wars atonement comes with the full arc of the three movies when Luke discovers that Vader is his father and must reckon with what that means for him. However, it is also possible to look solely at A New Hope and the less literal atonement moment where Luke has accomplished his mission of rescuing Leia and has a choice of what to do and decides to stay to try to destroy the Death Star. He is contrasted with Han, who chooses to leave and go home. Luke wanted an adventure and his family being killed and meeting Han and nearly getting crushed in a trash compactor and losing Obi-Wan were surely not what he expected, but all of it leads him to believe that he wants to be a Jedi and fight with the rebels and stop this super-weapon.

Likewise, there is an overarching plot to all of he Harry Potter novels where Harry uses the golden snitch to meet with his own father and the rest of his family and Sirius in order to give him the courage to face Voldemort (and in this overarching plot, Dumbledore is more of the mentor than Hagrid). It is more difficult to say in The Philosopher's Stone itself. Structurally, Harry facing down Quirrell would be the point of the expected meeting, but Harry makes no real decision at this point that isn't within the character he already seemed to have. And he doesn't defeat Quirrell by any conscious action but rather survives through magic. Arguably the moment of decision comes earlier, when Harry meets Dumbledore in front of the Mirror of Erised. Harry must make a decision about whether to become consumed by dreams or to live life, play the hand he has been dealt. This section is full of fatherly symbolism, with Dumbledore being a father-figure offering fatherly advice, Harry's actual father being one of the people he sees in the mirror, and him sneaking out to get to the mirror using his father's old Invisibility Cloak, gifted to him by Dumbledore. Harry is at his most vulnerable in the story here and we see his deepest wish, but when Dumbledore asks him not to go looking for the mirror again, Harry agrees and rejoins life at Hogwarts with his new family, Ron and Hermione.

In The Wizard of Oz, Dorothy defeats the Wicked Witch of the West, a task assigned to her by the Wizard in order to get him to return her home. She has done everything he has asked and bonded with her new friends, so they return to the Wizard only to discover that he is a fraud. He was just some dude from Omaha with some fancy gadgets behind a screen. He doesn't have the power to give them the things he promised.

Alice in Wonderland is more of a series of vignettes, so it's difficult to identify when Alice reaches a low point or a learning point on her journey. However, throughout the story, Alice encounters ridiculous characters and doesn't know what to do with their confusing talk. She is eventually put on trial with all of these nonsense arguments being thrown at her and she refuses to give in. The Queen shouts "Off with her head!" but before we can see what the result of all of this will be, Alice wakes up back in her old world. Arguably, Alice's journey was truncated before her atonement moment, but if you think she reached it, then what she learned in this moment was to maintain her own senses in the face of whatever else was unfolding around her.

The key part here is that, again, in the conqueror's journey, the meeting with the father is something helpful, where the hero can reflect and gather their thoughts for a final moment. Whereas in the acceptance journey, the hero looks back on all that has happened to them and it all seems to be meaningless. The father figure was a fraud.

## 3. The Return
In the conquering journey, we are heading for the point called "Master of Two Worlds". The Atonement with the Father allowed the hero to learn something important about themselves. Now the hero can use this thing that they have learned to overcome something, to conquer it. This final defeat in the world they have entered makes them master of something in this new world. And the thing that they learned about themselves makes them master of an internal world as well, usually allowing them to return to their original world and fix whatever was bothering them there.

In A New Hope, Luke combines his skill from shooting on the farm with the trust in the Force that Obi-Wan taught him to make the shot that destroys the Death Star. Now he is a hero of the rebel army and has a place in it, and he has understood the Force and can begin to embrace his role as a Jedi.

In Philosopher's Stone, Harry finds his place with his friend at Hogwarts. He has to return to the Dursleys for the summer, but he knows he can survive it because of all that he survived at school that year and because he knows that he'll be returning to his new life the next year.

The world is also changed by the hero. Luke is, as the title says, a new hope for the rebels. They have a Jedi they can train to face off against Vader. Harry can tell everyone that Voldemort is back (although not everyone believes him) and people will hear the new tale of how the boy who lived defeated Voldemort again.

In the accepting journey, what the hero learned doesn't seem to help them in this new world at all. Dorothy literally gets told that she had the power to go home with her all along. And this is re-emphasized by her friends' stories. Oz is a fantastical place full of incredible creatures and magic, but the things that you really want don't need magic and can't be earned from some all-powerful Wizard through weird quests. The Wizard gives the scarecrow, tinman and lion a mess of stuff that vaguely resembles brains, a heart and courage. But there is no particular thing that makes someone brave. There is no single secret to brains or a heart. They had the capacity for smarts, heart and courage inside them all along.

And while Dorothy's actions do change Oz, getting rid of two Wicked Witches, Dorothy still really has no place there. She returns to her own world and her Aunt and Uncle are certainly grateful to find her safe after the tornado, but there is no drastic change in her role in this world either. (I will acknowledge that there are later books where Dorothy learns new things and has more of a place in Oz, although I cannot recall all of the details).

And what does Alice learn from Wonderland? That the world is crazy and no one is to be trusted. She comes to on the river bank with the same old boring sister and lots to think about, but no obvious new path.

There is no great re-ordering of the world in the acceptance story, or at least not one that our hero has a place in. They return to their old world and they find a new place in it for themselves because they learned something about themselves on their journey, but they don’t change their old world because the thing that they’ve most learned on their journey is that the world is a chaotic place and what they have really developed is a way to survive the chaos.

## What sort of journey is The Last Jedi?
Part of the difficulty with The Last Jedi is trying to untangle all of the plots to get to Rey's story! When Luke goes to get trained by Yoda in Empire, Yoda fills the role of wise old teacher and, as such, doesn't have much of his own journey. But this isn't the case with Luke and his and Rey's plotlines are so wound up together as they learn from each other. And even though we learn some things about Vader in Empire, the focus is still on Luke and it is not clear how tied together their stories are until the end, whereas here Kylo Ren is connected to a bunch of people, including telepathically with Rey. So his quite complex story is woven in there as well and we need to pick out the parts that are important for Rey. Here is my best attempt at a breakdwon.

### 1. Crossing the Threshold
First, we need to identify two worlds. Rey was born on a desert planet and then left, but that is the first world in The Force Awakens, where Han was her mentor. This story is a continuation, so we might consider it as starting a little before the beginning of this movie, where Rey has found a place in the Resistance and has been sent to find Luke, presumably to be trained as a Jedi the way that Luke was sent by Obi-Wan to be trained by Yoda. And hopefully to return with Luke. In that case, Rey would actually cross the threshold when she joins Luke and he is her mentor, but not a very good one.

But really, that seems to be more of the identification for Luke's story. Luke is comfortable being grumpy on his own outer planet when Rey shows up and disrupts that. He tries to refuse the call, but eventually she convinces him to do some training and he must face down his demons from the past and so on. Yoda shows back up when an atonement moment is needed.

However, there is also a case to be made that Rey's belief in the Jedi path *is* her ordinary world. She knows she has the Force. She has Luke's lightsaber. She has his location. She has wondered since she was a child who her parents are and why they left her and she believes this may be the beginning of some answers. And Luke keeps trying to tell her that he isn't the one to teach her, the Jedi aren't all they're cracked up to be, but she refuses to listen, eventually convincing him to give her three quick lessons (of which I think he only finishes two) and journeying down into a cave to confront herself. In that case, the "normal world" would be one where Rey believes in the old Jedi order and training and it would be when she finally leaves Luke and the planet that she finally crosses the threshold, going out to face Kylo Ren and Snoke herself. If she has a mentor at this point, it is presumably Kylo himself, who also left Luke without finishing training.

Here, we find ourselves a bit between journey types. Rey certainly chooses to visit Luke. And she also chooses to leave, so she hasn't accidentally stumbled into some new world that she can't get out of if she so chooses. However, it is difficult to argue she has much of a guide. She has R2 and Chewie and Leia, so she isn't totally on her own, but there is no one to help her deal with the Force itself or the responsibility it brings, except Kylo, who is not to be trusted.

### 2. Atonement with the Father
Kylo tells Rey that her parents were nobody, as she has always secretly suspected. In that moment, Kylo offers his hand and Rey has a choice.

I wouldn't say that the father figure is really a fraud here. Rey had a belief about her parents and it didn't turn out to be true, but she was the one lying to herself. And even then, it seems she suspected the truth deep down. So Rey does learn that the world is a more chaotic place than she might have imagined, where not everyone with Jedi powers is descended from a heroic bloodline or gets trained by an old master or follows a clear path, but this also seems to be something she almost expected. When Kylo offers her the chance for order, a sort of family, someone who could help her learn about the Force and give her a way forward, she rejects it. Like Dorothy realizing that the Wizard isn't all-powerful and then finding that she had the power to get what she wanted all along, Rey has the power to choose her own path here and she does.

(There is, of course, Luke himself as a father-figure and there is a moment where Luke turns out to be an illusion. But that isn't part of Rey's story; it's part of Kylo's. Kylo faced a chaotic world as a child, with famous parents and grandparents of various sides and Snoke invading his mind. Then he went to get trained and awoke to find the man he thought was his mentor looming over him and he left and threw himself into the chaos to try to survive. Kylo seems to be making his way through his own accepting journey, but it isn't clear that he'll ever actually hit the point where he accepts that the world is chaotic and he can't control that).


### 3. The Return
Rey finds her friends and they head down to the salt planet where Rey does some nice piloting and then Force-lifts some rocks to help them escape. As the second movie in a trilogy, we don't necessarily expect a clear victory at the end, but there is hope here. Rey returns to the resistance after her battle with Kylo, choosing her path. Also it seems Rey stole some of Luke's books, so even if she doesn't have a conventional mentor, she still has some sort of guidance.

But it is difficult to say that the world has been substantially changed by her personally (indirectly as a result of Kylo's actions, which she was a part of, sure). Unlike A New Hope, Rey is not The Last Jedi. Luke intends to be the last Jedi and Kylo also thinks this. The camera does focus on Rey when Luke tells Kylo that he's not the last Jedi, but the movie implies that Rey is not either. There is more going on in the world than just this one story; it's not about one person, as it so often is in a conquering journey.

Yet, it's not quite an accepting journey. Rey doesn’t just learn to survive the madness of this world of the First Order or whatever world Kylo is going to create. She makes a choice to return to the resistance and fight for change. If you went into the movie expecting a conquering journey, this probably felt lacking, but if you thought it was an accepting journey, this was probably more than you expected.

### An Absurd Proposal
Many conquering journeys involve a certain amount of destiny. Sometimes more directly, through bloodlines or lightning scars that make the hero a Chosen One. Others involve hard work and sacrifice, but the hero ultimately learns that these things are worth it because they led to the hero's ability to succeed. Those choice meant something.

In the acceptance journey, the ultimate lesson is that the world is a crazy, mixed-up place. People will betray you and working hard doesn't magically bring you what you want and you can’t ever really be a Master of Two Worlds. On this journey, your choices don't gain you any heroic position or reward except maybe the ability to survive in such a chaotic world.

It doesn't seem that The Last Jedi can be classified as a conquering journey. Rey isn't chosen by blood or fully trained by a Jedi master. She puts everything she has into trying to turn Kylo, but that isn't enough. She doesn't get to use anything she has learned to blow up a super-weapon (although she does move the rocks for the escape). And it isn't just Rey's story either. Poe's plan and Finn and Rose's trip to space-Monte Carlo does not save the day (and puts everyone in more danger) despite their best intentions and full effort. And Rose stops Finn's suicide run at the cannon, denying him that conventional heroic sacrifice moment.

But I am reluctant to classify it as an acceptance journey either. There is a sense the world is confusing and sometimes unfair. But I wouldn't say that the message is just to accept that and survive until you can get safely home. 

There are philosophies that believe in a clockwork world, where everything plays out as it is destined to. And if you don't believe in such a world, then you might try to gain enough power to influence the world and bend it to your will, which is presumably the goal of the First Order. But if you don't believe in destiny and you don't believe it is right to try to control others, then what do you do? Isn't the world just chaos? This was the question posed by existentialists: what is the point? And the answer that at least the absurdists came up with was: yes, the world is chaos, but the choices that we make still matter.

And this is essentially what the movie seems to be trying to say too. When Rose stops Finn, she tells him that it doesn't just matter that they stop the First Order; it matters how and why they stop the First Order. The choices that they make in this fight matter. That is also what Rey learned: she couldn't make Luke train her and she couldn't turn Kylo back toward the light, but she could choose to overcome those setbacks and return to the resistance. When Leia tells Rey as they fly away at the end that the resistance has everything they need, she could mean that they have a Jedi and a ship and strong tacticians, but she could also mean that they have their integrity, the ability to choose the sort of world they want to fight for and the sort of people they want to be.


