---
layout: post
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
title: "Sense and Sensitivity"
tags: personalities politics
---

A friend of mine posted a quote on Facebook that included this:

> Highly sensitive people are too often perceived as weaklings or damaged goods. To feel intensely is not a symptom of weakness, it is the trademark of the truly alive and compassionate.

It is from Anthony St. Maarten and the quote as a whole is about expressing your feelings without it being perceived as weakness. That part I don't disagree with, but since "sensitive people" is often taken to mean those who frequently demonstrate emotion, I want to challenge the idea that we can identify compassion and "alive-ness" by outward intensity of feeling.

A friend (not the one who posted the quote) and I once got into an argument at University. At one point she started to choke up and her voice started to rise. When I continued to argue with her, she suggested that because she was a very sensitive person and I never showed emotion, she must care more than me and therefore I should agree to do things her way. Since then, I have occasionally run across this sentiment, that people with the strongest outward show of emotion are the ones who care most deeply about an issue. The opinions of people who don't wear their heart on their sleeve matter less. I take issue with this idea on several levels.

<!--more-->

## There are many ways to show you care

My family doesn't really get upset. We don't yell at each other. We rarely cry. But I have never taken that to mean that we weren't "truly alive" or that what they were saying to me mattered less than what I thought. If I take the time to have a serious discussion with someone, it is because it matters to me. And they will take that into account when responding.

Nothing was really taboo and everything was negotiable, but how much outward emotion you showed was less a sign of how passionate you were and more a sign that you were frustrated and not able to have a full discussion just then. If something really mattered to you, you would take the time to compose yourself and explain yourself. Maybe my family is super-repressed (I had an English teacher who seemed to think this and found it unbelievable that I couldn't think of a time my Mom had lost it on me), but it's just how I grew up.

As such, I don't really equate being emotional with degree of passion for something and certainly not to compassion. Not giving up on something seems like at least as valid a way of demonstrating that you care about something as getting emotional about it. Actually, I would consider time spent a *better* indicator of passion because our time on this Earth is finite, whereas emotion is bottomless. If someone gets upset frequently about many subjects, it isn't a very good indicator of what they're passionate about. It is just an indication that they get upset a lot. As stated in the original quote, this shouldn't be used to look down on sensitive people, but neither should it be used to suggest such people care more than those who hold emotion back.

## Should caring more mean your opinion matters more?

I don't actually have an answer to this question, but it's something I have thought about a lot lately. I was living in the UK at the time of the Brexit vote and through the subsequent "will of the people" rhetoric. Invoking the "will of the people" in this context is now synonymous with saying that a majority of people voted for something. I can follow this line of thinking, that fairness dictates that everyone gets an equal say and more people voted for something, therefore it is indicative of what people want overall. But is a simple count a good indication of will? If the goal is a relatively happy society where people feel their main concerns are heard, then shouldn't the opinions of those who care more about an issue be weighted more?

In a practical sense, this is obviously not possible in a referendum vote because we have no good way of deciding who cares more. But representative democracy seems designed to force us to acknowledge that it isn't just the number of people who want something that matters, but how badly they want it. Any given general election will involve discussion about many topics within many broad categories, such as the economy, social services, security and others. But I only get one vote for one person. It is up to me to decide what is most important and who I trust on the issues that I care most about. The limited number of parties means that I will basically always be voting with someone with whom I disagree on some things, but I set those things aside because I don't care about them as much.

To return to the Brexit example, one could argue that there were certainly many passionate and vocal Leave voters (now you can find vocal Remainers as well, but they were few and far between before the vote), but I would still contend that a substantial number of Leave voters did not consider the UK being in the EU to be an issue of primary importance in their lives.

How could we know? Well, there was an entire political party formed around the UK's independence from the EU, but they only ever elected 2 MPs to the House (out of 650 possible seats). Part of this might be the First-Past-the-Post electoral system, but if leaving the EU was something you cared about above all else, I suspect you would still cast that vote to send a message, even if you thought it wouldn't get anyone elected. Even in the UK elections for the EU Parliament, which deals solely with questions of EU policy and where MEPs are elected proportionally, UKIP received only 27.5% of the vote in 2014. So even in elections focused solely on questions of the UK's role in the EU, only 1 in 4 people voted for the party in favour of independence. All of which suggests that a significant number of people who voted to Leave the EU when forced to choose *on that question alone* had previously decided that other things were more important in a broader vote with more issues at stake. So straight numbers don't always seem to align with "will" in the sense of what people *really* want, what they prioritize.

As another example, in Canada, a majority of people support the death penalty when surveyed. But Canada does not have the death penalty and, what's more, there isn't a major political party campaigning on bringing it back. It seems as though a lot of people have an opinion about the issue, but very few care enough to spend the time fighting to change anything.

As I said, I don't have an answer here. To me, these things suggest that passion does play a role in whose opinion matters, but it is complex. In the discussion with my University friend, she seemed to be suggesting that every issue should be considered like a referendum, where more outward emotion wins, but compromise is about identifying your priorities and knowing what you are willing to trade-off versus what you absolutely wouldn't sacrifice.

That we must compromise and prioritize seems to be one of the things that many people find frustrating about representative democracy. I get one vote, the same as everyone else, so that part seems fair (barring any geographical or other weighting depending on your electoral system), but there is no one who perfectly represents me. I get a choice, but none of the choices are everything that I want. I have to think about what matters most and then try to convince others about why it matters.

Of course, voting isn't the only place for citizens in a democracy and if I *really* care about things, I can try to get a group together to protest or organize some letter-writing to change the minds of the people voted in. I could even run myself. But those are bigger time commitments and so this whole tangent about passion and choice in representative democracy just brings me back to the earlier point that passion is about putting in time and effort, not about what you show on the surface.

Overall, passion matters, but this can't be determined simply by people declaring that they are sensitive because then the voices of sensitive people are always the ones being prioritized and quiet but persistent people will be shut out.

## Sensitivity as explanation versus sensitivity as excuse

I don't remember the first article I saw about how nerds now rule the world, but I now frequently see think pieces about the value of nerds and quiet people and introverts. As a nerd and a quiet person and an introvert, I generally enjoy being told how I am Doing It Right and about to be hugely successful. It is also nice that these pieces exist so that the concepts become part of the culture and then if there is an awkward moment somewhere, I can say "Haha. Yeah, I am obviously an introvert." And the other person will probably know what I mean and know that whatever awkwardness is not something personal or something they did wrong.

However, I have also seen these pieces posted on Facebook by people who seem to be using them as a sort of pre-emptive strike: "Yes, I will come to your party. But don't blame me if I am rude and unresponsive. I'm just an introvert!" Recognizing that you have a certain personality type and some things don't come easily to you is fine, but it's not a blanket excuse to stop making an effort at personal growth. That isn't introversion; it is just lazy and rude. If you truly don't want to participate in social gatherings: don't go. If, however, you value the social relationships that you have and you think that a social gathering is an important part of maintaining them, that means you may occasionally have to go to events and be open to talking to people. You don't have to be perfect and you don't have to stay the whole night, but you do have to try. A personality trait isn't an excuse for behaviour; it is only an explanation.

This is the sort of attitude parodied in [Sorry I Murdered Everyone, But I'm an Intovert](http://the-toast.net/2014/11/10/sorry-murdered-everyone-im-introvert/). A very extreme version seems part of the idea behind [distinguishing introverts from certain kinds of narcissist](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/beautiful-minds/23-signs-youe28099re-secretly-a-narcissist-masquerading-as-a-sensitive-introvert/). And it is just the sort of thing my friend seemed to be suggesting when she said that she was a sensitive person and therefore what she felt should matter more.

And, at the risk of giving a one-sided account our friendship, I did eventually become more distant with this friend because I found her to be emotionally demanding while offering little understanding in return. She got upset when I asked if her boyfriend needed to be over at our house so often when she wasn't there. When other friends expressed concern about the way this boyfriend treated her (and them), she tried to put me in the middle and get me to confront them for her. She used part of my rent money to go out on a date with a different boyfriend and then blamed me when she didn't have enough money to pay the landlord. She had many good qualities too and we were young and people grow up, so these few incidents are not a complete summary of her character, but they are all instances when she became very upset for reasons that she would presumably say had to do with her being a sensitive and passionate person and she wanted me to bear an extra burden because I wasn't that sort of person. I wouldn't call any of those actions compassionate. A compassionate person would try to have more consideration of the way their boyfriend treats their friends or the value of someone's rent money.

Demanding everyone else alter their behaviour to cater to your emotional state is actually kind of selfish. It is a big disconnect to claim that you are so sensitive because you are so compassionate, but to actually be using that as a cover to avoid changing in some way that would increase your personal discomfort. If you are trying to tell people that you are upset or emotional because actually you are really special and have tons of important empathy, check whether you are actually trying to claim a greater sensitivity to the world in order to dismiss other people's feelings as less than your own. Because that would be the opposite of sensitivity.

## Could we just listen to people, regardless of emotional state?

A sensitive person would acknowledge that not everyone expresses themselves in the same way and try to allow for that in their interactions. A compassionate person would not suggest that their own outward emotion is indicative of a greater way of living, being "truly alive" while others are, one supposes, spiritually dead or something.

So let's not identify sensitivity as the marker of compassion and what matters. Let's not act like people who aren't super-emotive can't also feel things deeply. Maybe let's just take the things people say seriously, regardless of whether they're big talkers. If someone tells you something is important to them, try to listen, regardless of whether you think they are sensitive.
