---
layout: post
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
title: "Stoicism and Goals"
tags: philosophy stoicism
---

What do you want out of life?

As we begin the New Year, this is the question that a lot of people are attempting to answer. Many people will resolve to lose weight (or the trendier and broader way to put it “get healthier”), find a partner, write a novel or get a better job.

This is also the question that opens William Irvine’s book “A Guide to the Good Life”. I have only just started the book, an attempt to outline ways to apply stoicism to daily life, although I have read bits of Epictetus and Seneca previously. Irvine begins by distinguishing between the things that one wants “in life” versus what they want “out of life”. He argues that something like getting a better job might be something you want "in life".

So then what does it mean to want something "out of life"? I think that is a good and somewhat unusual place to start with goal-setting and I have done the exercise a few times now and will be working through it again in the first couple of weeks of January, so I thought I would summarize here a few of the questions I like to ask when re-evaluating where I am at and what I should be doing differently. I am not going to answer them specifically, just because I find it easier to be honest when the answers are private.
<!--more-->

##What do you want out of life?
To start with, consider re-interpreting this question. What would you like your legacy to be? When you leave this life, what do you hope you leave behind? How do you hope that people view you and the things that you have done? In this sense, it probably doesn’t matter that much whether you lose weight or are healthier, except as a means to achieving other things that you might view as important. Similarly with a job or a novel.

##Dig down
Another thing you can do is dig down and ask why you want to do the things you say you want to do. Do you want to write a novel to be famous? Maybe the thought has occurred to you, but why do you want to be famous? What will that get you? A lot of people want to write because they think they have something valuable to say. They think that other people might learn from their experiences or that they might help someone connect with an idea in a way that they hadn’t before. You could even go further than this and ask why you feel this desire to try to connect with people. Maybe a novel isn't even the best way to achieve your underlying goal.

Why might you want a better job? Perhaps to get more money, but why do you need more money? Don't be dismissive of an answer just because it might seem shallow at first. We need a certain amount of money to be secure and comfortable and to help our family and friends. So saying that you want more money is not a bad reason for doing something, but it is probably not the end of the story.

##Get big before you get small
When we start the goal-setting process, we might know in the back of our minds that we want to write a novel because we think we have something important to say about faith or judgment or existential crises. But people don’t usually write that part down. They don't seem to want to admit it or commit it to paper. It is almost as though it seems too big, maybe even arrogant.

There is a lot of good goal-setting advice about getting specific ([SMART goals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMART_criteria) are Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic and Time-bound) and I fully believe in this. I have started transitioning from to-do lists to a more calendar-based system because I kept letting things slide on the list and getting bumped to the next day and the next day. They weren't time-bound enough. Day-to-day, having specific, time-bound goals is important.

But when I do the initial setting, I like to start from this fuller perspective and think about *why* I really want to do things. When my sister took a first-year psych course at Uni, she once told me "Do you know the biggest reason that people fail at diets? It’s because people fail at diets." By this tautology, she meant that people have this whole diet plan, but then they overeat once and they think "Well, that's it. I've broken the plan. What's the point in going on?" But of course the plan was so much more than one meal. If your overall goal is to get rid of your lower back pain so that you can focus and complete your other goals more easily (and weight loss is part of addressing your back pain), then one night of ice cream binging doesn't matter (and neither does eating nothing but steamed broccoli and boneless, skinless chicken breasts for 3 straight days).

If I have it written down why I want to do something, then when I start to doubt that what I am writing in the middle of Chapter 4 is important or when I am getting dressed for my 10th job interview or heading to the gym at 5:30 am, I can look back. Why am I doing this? Oh, right. That’s why.

I also like to review every 4 or 5 months for a reminder. And sometimes I decide at that point that maybe something isn't worth doing any more or it's not achieving what I had hoped it would. If my goal in getting a better job was to have more flexible hours to spend more time with my family, but these interviews are really eating into that time and the job market is terrible right now, maybe it isn’t the right time.

##Anxiety
I am a fairly anxious person. I haven’t had any testing and I don't have generalized anxiety, but I can certainly spend a lot of time worrying about future events or ruminating on past events that, in the grand scheme of things, are not that big a deal. I worry a lot less today about what other people think of me than I did when I was a kid (partly just grew out of it, but also partly just had to in order to function), but when I find myself stuck on something or having difficulty speaking up, it is usually because I am worried about what other people think. Not even always specific people, just “people” generally. And there is certainly a time for taking other people’s feelings into consideration, but goal-setting is not this time.

Stoicism can help here too. If your goals are set with the question of what you want out of life as the starting point, then they are likely about achieving very fundamental things. The stoics referred to "virtue" as the ultimate goal or the sole good, which sounds a bit sanctimonious as translated into modern English, but they meant that we should aim to be courageous, just and modest and develop wisdom to take action for those things. Which they acknowledged was not simple! It was something you had to practice every day. But the point here is that if those sorts of things are your goal, then that matters more than your personal reputation and so you shouldn't worry about what people think of you. Or rather, you should be willing to risk that reputation for what is right if you need to.

"Easier said than done" I am sure you are thinking. But set that thought aside for a moment and imagine what would you do if you were free from anxiety? So many things, right?

The good news is that stoicism says we can be free from anxiety. The bad news is that its "solution" is that you just have to not feel anxious about things. Because anxiety comes from your own perception of the world, no one can make you anxious except yourself.

This is often mis-interpreted as developing a cold, uncaring persona where you don't have feelings and don't want things, but that's not really what the Stoics were saying if you read more deeply. Many ancient Stoics were very civically engaged, trying to speak up for what they believed to be right along with trying to better themselves. And you can't do that without wanting things or having goals, but there are two important tricks here.

1. Fate-permitting. You can have a goal and you have control over the actions that you take in an attempt to work toward it, but you usually do not have complete control over the outcome of those actions. You may be thwarted in attempting to reach your goal.

...This probably sounds a bit defeatist if you’re used to “power of positive thinking” type goal-setting, where anything is achievable if we just work hard enough and believe hard enough. In that type of goal-setting, we try to envision what we want to come true. Stoicism asks us to do the opposite: imagine what could go wrong and how we could respond to it. And if we have prepared as best we can for obstacles and things still don't work out, perhaps fate just had other plans.

...Epictetus said “An uninstructed person will lay the fault of his own bad condition upon others. Someone just starting instruction will lay the fault on himself. Someone who is perfectly instructed will place blame neither on others nor on himself.” [Enchiridion, 5](http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html)

...Many people already believe this when things go their way, insisting that they had help or they got lucky, but for some reason they blame themselves personally when things don't work out. If you truly missed planning for something you believe you should have seen coming, then learn from the experience, but realize also that sometimes things beyond our control happen. And then, as 3rd-grade-soccer-coach as it might sound, you must be satisfied with knowing that you tried your best, even if you didn't win this particular game.

2. There are subtleties of language that I am probably going to get wrong, but the Stoics distinguished between passions (movements of the soul) and other feelings. So there is a sort of wanting that is a reaching of the soul, that comes from the gut, that they deemed to be bad. This is an irrational wanting where you ignore that some things are beyond your personal ability to achieve and are in the hands of fate. They distinguish this from good wishes, striving for something rather than yearning for it. They believed this could be rational because you can wish for something to go well or for the world to change, while still accepting that your own actions are only a small contribution to that wish. What matters in the end is not the outcome of one specific action, but the overall commitment to virtue.

##Stoicism and anxiety
Part of what I like about stoicism is the regular reminder that I do not have control over what other people do or feel, only over my own actions. So if I say that I want to write a novel because I really think I have something valuable to say, that’s fine, but I should recognize that I don’t have any control over how people feel when they read the book. All that I can do is try to write the best book I can, that presents the things I want to say clearly. And I can try to be open and accepting when an editor or others give me edits and ask whether those edits help to convey what I wanted to say. And if I did that, then I did everything that I had control over to try to achieve my goal, but I don’t have any control over whether other people like the book, whether they “get it” the way that I want them to. I must be happy with what I have written and everything else is up to fate.

One of the most weirdly inspiring thing I have seen is [this talk by Mallory Ortberg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n1ui7LCC6So) where she says “I guess what I am trying to say is that you’re going to be okay and then you’re going to die and so am I, which takes a lot of the pressure off”. She has previously poked some fun at the stoics and certainly the statement could come from a nihilist or an absurdist, but in any case, I like it. It is strangely freeing, to be able to think to myself that maybe I will write this thing and no one else will understand. And then one day I will die. But if I wrote the thing that I wanted to, that is still something.

##Overcoming anxiety??
So then how can we incorporate this into goal-setting? How can we deal with anxiety both in setting goals and in overcoming our fear of looking silly or upsetting people when trying to achieve them? Here are three exercises.

1. Firstly, and my go-to, I recommend just trying to sit with your anxiety for a while and dissect it. Sometimes, when I'm anxious about something, I think to myself "I have thought about this too much" but actually what I have done is thought around it a lot, seen the problems or worries or discomfort out of the corner of my eye without ever really looking straight at them. Find a period of 10-15 minutes where you can be dedicatedly uncomfortable without avoiding the feeling. Feel the anxiety and ask yourself what exactly you are anxious about. What would happen to you if the worst were to happen? Really try to think through without shying away. Could things get even worse than that?

...But then ask yourself, okay, if all that happened, what would you have left? Would you still be okay? Have you been through something like that before and how did you get through it? When you have survived something painful, parts of you got trod upon and battered, but some parts of you survived. What parts of you are most indestructible? What parts would you like to be indestructible? If some part of you had to get crushed, which parts of you would you be willing to let go and which would you want to protect?

...The Stoics would argue that the most important things that you should try to preserve would be courage, justice, temperance and practical wisdom. That is all you ever *need* to have, according to them, although there are certainly other things it might be nice to have.

2. Another approach is to imagine interviewing yourself when you are 80. And ask yourself if the thing you are doing or wanted to do was really important, whether you are glad you spent the time doing it, whether it affected how other people saw you. If you have the opportunity to talk to an older person about what they are glad they did in life and what they wish they had spent more time on or done differently, this can be really helpful for keeping things in perspective.

...Or if you don't like the interview style, you can picture yourself in the room you're in, in your house or apartment, in your city, and so on to the Earth and then expanding out into the Universe. It is a common stoic exercise to think about your place in the Universe in different ways. Watch the sunset. Think about how many sunsets there have been on Earth and how many remain. Think about what will happen after our Sun dies. How will the thing you are worrying about fit into your life? How will it be viewed in 100 years or 1000 years. You are a small part of a giant Universe. As a piece, what you do still matters, but it is only a small piece. We can each only contribute our little bit.

3. You can also think about people that you believe have lived a good life, including people close to you, people in your field at work (or the field that you would like to be in) or historical figures. Why do you think they led a good life? What did they stand for and what sorts of things did they do that meant something? Do you think that they upset people, accidentally or for a particular cause? Most likely, you won't have heard about any embarrassing mistakes that they made unless it is in an autobiography or talk that they gave about themselves, but try to think about how they might have responded to making a mistake. How do you think people will view them in 100 years? How did their actions matter to you?

##And that's about it
So now you have thought about what you really want out of life, and worked through some of the things that might have been holding you back. That gives you a why and a how. Now you can move on to outlining more specific plans with whens and wheres and whats, the targeted daily practice to work toward these things.

For the ancient Stoics, living a life guided solely by virtue was their ultimate goal, but they were also not sure whether anyone had every actually managed to achieve this. So if you find yourself a little behind schedule on the virtue front by mid-February, know that you're in good company.
